# Emperor of Mankind

> Quelle: [https://wh40k.lexicanum.com/wiki/The_Emperor_of_Mankind](https://wh40k.lexicanum.com/wiki/The_Emperor_of_Mankind) — Lexicanum (CC BY-SA). Auszug für private Kampagnen-Vorbereitung.

|  |  |
| --- | --- |

*"The Emperor, you see, protects...He protects mankind, through the Legions, through the martial corps, through the war machines of the Mechanicum...The Emperor is our truth and our light. If we trust in him, he will protect."*

— Saint Euphrati Keeler, Remembrancer of the 63rd Expeditionary Fleet

| --- | --- |
| ***The Emperor of Mankind*** | |
| **Title(s)** | The God-Emperor And others |
| **Homeworld** | Terra (Earth), Sol System |
| **Born** | c. 8,000 B.C. |
| **Active Period** | 8,000 B.C. — 014.M31 (Active) 0.14.M31 — Era Indomitus (Golden Throne) |
| **Death** | See Transcendence |
| **Species** | Human |
| **Type** | Perpetual |
| **Relatives** | * Human biological parents (names not mentioned) * Uncle (name not mentioned) * Mortal brothers and sisters (names not mentioned) * The Sensei (Direct Descendants) * The Primarchs (Genetic sons) * Grey Knights ("Sons" via gene-seed) |
| **Occupation(s)** | * God-Emperor of the Imperium of Man * Deity of the Imperial Cult |
| **Affiliation(s)** | * Pre-Imperial Terra   + Proto-Hyttites   + The empire of Alysaundr[Note 5] * Imperium of Man   + Great Crusade War Council   + Principia Imperialis |

The **Emperor of Mankind**, also referred to by the Imperial Cult and the Adeptus Ministorum as the **God-Emperor of Mankind**, is the sovereign ruler of the Imperium of Man, and Father, Guardian, and God of the human race. He has sat immobile within the Golden Throne of Terra for ten thousand years. Although once a living man, his shattered body can no longer support life, and remains intact only by a combination of ancient technology and the sheer force of his will, itself sustained by the soul-sacrifice of countless millions of psykers.

His will is omnipotent, extending across the hundreds of billions of worlds that comprise his Imperium. For ten thousand years the Master of Mankind has served Humanity, simultaneously carrying out a multitude of tasks vital to its survival. He simultaneously guides his race through the Emperor's Tarot, soul-binds psykers, holds audiences with his most important servants and directs the Astronomican beacon that guides space vessels through the Warp. His immense psychic powers constantly keep the Chaos Gods in the Warp at bay, preventing their intrusion into the material universe and protecting his people throughout the Galaxy.

The Emperor's role as guardian of mankind seems to have been predestined for him. Without the Emperor there would be no Imperium, little space travel and no protection from the multitude of threats facing mankind. The Emperor knows that to protect his race he must survive as long as necessary for the emerging race of psychic humans to evolve sufficiently.

In the millennia since his ascension to the Golden Throne, the Emperor has become a god to his people, the worship of him uniting Humanity throughout his Imperium, superstition and dogma replacing his doctrine of Imperial Truth.

## History

### Ancient History

#### Birth and Childhood

Little is known about the majority of the Emperor's life; of who he was and what he did before he emerged as the great Emperor of Mankind, only the Emperor himself remembers. Though a product of natural birth, the Emperor's origin goes back much further than this. The very first primitive humans of Earth developed a special relationship with the warp. As simple hunters and gathers, they were close to the "natural forces" which flowed through life like a river, likened to a natural rhythm. Some of them were particularly attuned to this, becoming shamans and tribal witches (powerful psykers among primitive mankind). For as long as any of these shamans could remember, at least millions of years going back to the dawn of "their race"[Note 9] in Africa, upon death their souls would enter the warp - bathing in its energies while awaiting renewal in a new body. As humanity grew and civilization developed, mankind grew distant from the natural forces, as well as became more disharmonious, feeding the growth of Chaos.

The Shamans found it more difficult to draw upon their powers and worse, felt that they were slowly losing the ability to reincarnate. Shaman souls were being lost, chased, and consumed by malignant Chaos Powers. Fearing this, all the shamans on Earth gathered at once place. After many centuries of debate and research (the longest debate in human history), they came to a conclusion: mankind's greed and ambition disrupt the natural rhythm, leading to the decline of the planet, and the eventual doom of the species and themselves, creating warp entities that would consume them all. Worse, they had but only one or two reincarnations left. Not wishing to die without purpose or hope, the shamans decided to pool all their energies together. Thousands of shamans swallowed poison and died, their kind being gone from the world. A year later, a being called *The New Man* was born to mortal parents in the 8th Millennium BC. According to a vision he shared with the Custodes Ra Endymion during the Webway War, his parents and tribe spoke a proto-Indo-Europan language that would later be known as a precursor to the Hyttite dialect, and his family's home was a primitive village along the banks of the Sakarya River[Note 3] in central Anatolia.

As the Emperor grew, his powerful mind could sift through the energies of the warp, enter the lives of plants and animals, promote harmony, and ease the suffering of others. In the vision he showed to Ra, the Emperor's childhood involved the mundane manual toil of working the land of his family's farm. While a young adolescent, his father was murdered by his uncle. While preparing his father's body for a primitive funeral ritual, he received a vision of his murder. Later, the boy who would become the Emperor calmly approached his uncle and stopped his heart with his psychic abilities, displaying neither sorrow nor malice. According to the Emperor himself, this was the moment he realised that Humanity needed law, order, and the guidance of a ruler. Shortly thereafter, he left his village for the first city of Humanity.[Note 4] Beyond the shared vision, it is stated that at some point he remembered how he was made by the ancient shamans to live forever, so that he would never have to reincarnate, and survive unchanged for eternity, and everything that lead up to his birth. Thus beginning an endless journey around the world and human history.

More than 48,000 years later, by M41 and the Era Indomitus, the true historical origins of The Emperor have been subsumed by the pious doctrine of the Ecclesiarchy. But the facts of his origin, the great sacrifice of the shamans and his creation, are remembered (if dim and distant) by The Emperor even as he sits immobile and silent on the Golden Throne. He alone remembers them, sharing it to none other, not even Malcador.

#### Early Life

The accounts compiled by the Keepers of the Library Sanctus on Terra, completed by Keeper Cripias record that the first age of man was the "Golden Age" where the Emperor laboured to prepare Old Earth for the ascent of Mankind – and that in this time the Emperor was joined by the "First Men" of the Golden Race who multiplied across humanity and established order and civilisation.

The Perpetual Erda met the Emperor, already a warlord, attempting to accelerate Human evolution and guide the race into a superior species. Erda became one of the Emperor's followers as he attempted to seek out and recruit every Perpetual on Earth to his cause. During this ancient time, the Emperor was known as **Neoth** (although Malcador the Sigillite has stated that none know the Emperor's true name).

At some point before recorded history, the Emperor became a king and organised his own armies with the Perpetual that would become known as Ollanius Persson as his Warmaster. Seeking to protect and guide Humanity, the two friends besieged a tower in East Phoenicia built by the Cult that would become known as the Cognitae. After their forces succeeded in capturing the tower, they discovered it covered in Enuncia and bleeding in the corrupting power of the Warp. Ollanius demanded the tower destroyed, while the Emperor wished to preserve the knowledge it held within in order to better protect against Chaos in the future. Disillusioned with the Emperor, Ollanius stabbed his king with a dagger and then uttered a line of Enuncia to destroy the tower and escape.

The immortal being who would become known as the Emperor proceeded to haunt the history of Humanity as a ghost, watching, waiting and occasionally influencing. Living secretly amongst mankind, he developed his abilities until his psychic might allowed him to gain knowledge of not only his own world, but of the dangers beyond it. Aware then of the vast predations awaiting Humanity, the being that would become known as the Emperor resolved to guide and protect Humanity. The Emperor took many forms during this time, both male and female. Some were brutal conquerors, some became "meek to inherit the Earth". One identity of the Emperor during this time was Alysaundr, and in an account given by Horus it is said that he wept before the River Hyphasis when he thought there were no more worlds to conquer.[Note 5] During the medieval period, the Emperor led a group of knights which killed the immortal Chaos devotee Gog, the owner of the ancient Athame blade.[Note 6]

The compiled account of Keeper Cripias continues that after the anarchy of nature was conquered by the "First Men" of the Golden Race that the "Second Men" of the Stone Race appeared, creating the marvels of technology and conjurations of great artifice which advanced humanity and in time brought both the Golden Race and Stone Race to space (and as humanity expands and the Golden Race dwindles in influence through their reliance upon the Stone Race the "Golden Age" of early humanity ends and the Dark Age of Technology begins). The Emperor, unseen, continued to prepare humanity for its future.

### Dark Age of Technology

During the Dark Age of Technology Alivia Sureka traveled with the man who would become the Emperor to the planet Molech, where there was a gateway into the realm of Chaos. The Emperor entered the Gateway, and there made a bargain with the Dark Gods and emerged wielding a measure of their power, including the ability to create the Primarchs. However for some reason, the Emperor did not keep his end of the bargain to spread Chaos to Humanity, and he became anathema to the Ruinous Powers. The Emperor was able to clone the energies with which he was imbued, giving them to his Primarchs after combining his own genetic material with that of Erda's. It is said that the Emperor created the Primarchs out of fear that Chaos would eventually corrupt all of humanity. In his labs he sought to create a genetically-engineered superhuman race immune to Chaos to replace humanity, a race with god-like abilities that was bred for strength and loyalty. Despite this, followers of the Emperor claim that he did not intend to replace humanity with the Primarchs, and that they were simply shining exemplars of humanity free from corruption.

At some point in Earth's history the Emperor discovered an ancient device beneath the ruins of Asia's deserts and became determined to completely cut off Humanity from the malignant influence of the Warp. The first step of this grand project was to substitute warp travel with the Webway, and the final phase would see the Emperor shepherd Humanity's evolution into a truly psychic race independent of Chaos, ascending to a level not even reached by the Eldar. This grand ambition was to guide all of the Emperor's undertakings and would be the culmination of his planning.

### Age of Strife

The compiled account of Keeper Cripias explains that the Dark Age of Technology ended as the Stone Race created and warred with the Men of Iron and the empire of humanity was torn asunder. In the intercene conflict which followed, Terra came under threat from a plague of mutation as well as the foul aliens which the empire of humanity had held back. As the Emperor's wards were killed and enslaved, he resolved to act: and the man who would be known as Emperor revealed himself.

The man who would later become known as the Emperor first appeared openly as one of the many warlords struggling for control of Terra during the latter part of the Age of Strife. He was at this point just another Terran warlord, but he met Malcador who convinced him to take the title of *Emperor*. He was once known as the Master of the Lines in a mountainous region of Terra. There he would seek out individuals whose genetics he could use in his Thunder Warrior project, as well as offering services of gene-editing at regional fairs to correct genetic mutations in couples planning to bear children. It was during this time he met Amar Astarte, with whom he and Erda worked closely on the Primarch Project. He also met Ezekiel Sedayne in the Alapi mountains, who would later develop the Black Carapace for the successors of the Thunder Warriors: The Legio Astartes. The Emperor undertook a series of campaigns against all the other warlords on the planet that would later be termed the Unification Wars. During these wars the Emperor employed several military formations - such as the Thunder Warriors and Geno Five-Two Chiliad — that consisted of genetically altered/engineered warriors, who played a significant role in his eventual victory. With this victory, the planet and population of Terra were at last unified under one rule; that of the Emperor.

### Great Crusade

With this achievement behind him, the Emperor then set in motion his plans to take his purpose of uniting and guarding mankind out into the stars, to unify with the bastions of Humanity scattered across the Galaxy. This undertaking would become known as the Great Crusade. The prospect of the Great Crusade and the bitter fate of the Primarchs horrified Erda, who viewed the creations as her sons. The Emperor also seemed to have more distant plans to continue his crusades to extend his dominion to other galaxies, after Humanity became enlightened to the nature of the warp and evolved into a species of powerful psykers.

The Emperor prepared extensively for the Great Crusade; he created the special astrotelepath corps to link his eventual dominion together, and built the Astronomican, a supremely powerful signal device powered by the Emperor's own psychic might that would allow simplified and safer travel through the Warp. Chief amongst his designs, however, was the creation of superhuman warriors, the logical extension of the gene-troopers already under his command. He had first undertaken the Primarch Project, the creation of twenty infants from his own genetic code, designed to mature into powerful generals for his armies. However, this plan went awry with the intervention of the Chaos Powers. Other sources state that the Emperor's longtime collegue and fellow Perpetual Erda cast the Primarchs into the Warp to deny the Emperor his plans for them. While accounts vary as to exactly what happened, the end of the tale is always the same; the Primarchs were cast into the Warp and thought lost. During the tumultuous event, the Emperor's gene-lab was devastated by the forces that scattered the Primarchs. He held up the collapsing underground roof with his psychic power until the vaults workers and data could be safely evacuated. Afterwards, Malcador and Constantin Valdor believed the Primarchs dead or corrupted. However, the Emperor sensed their echoes in the Warp and knew they were still alive. Malcador was surprised that the Emperor began to refer to the lost Primarchs as his "sons", something Valdor saw as an "ebb" in his attempts to suppress his human emotions.

In the aftermath of these events, the Emperor evolved a new plan. Using genetic material which had been derived from the Primarchs, he created a caste of warriors which would possess some of the qualities of the Primarchs. These successors to the genetically-altered warriors of the Unification Era were the Legiones Astartes, the Space Marines of the First Founding. After purging the Thunder Warriors and replacing them with these more efficient warriors, The Emperor led the Space Marines into the reconquest of the Sol System. He drove Xenos enslavers from the moons of Saturn and Jupiter and most importantly, achieved peace and eventual integration with the Mechanicum of Mars. This alliance provided the Emperor with much of the means and materiel to extend his crusade into the stars.

With the final abatement of the Warp storms began the Great Crusade. The Emperor's forces rediscovered human worlds, cast out alien oppressors, and claimed new territory aplenty. Perhaps most importantly, the Emperor, leading his crusade, rediscovered his lost sons, the Primarchs. Scattered throughout space, the infants were found one-by-one over a period of many decades, and reunited with their father and their kin. All were placed in command of the Astartes Legions created from their respective gene-seed and played their part in forging their father's Imperium.

First amongst the Primarchs was Horus, said to be first discovered and first honoured. However, a contradictory and dubious account given by Alpharius states that he was the first recovered by the Emperor, being found directly on Terra itself. Whatever the truth of Horus' order of discovery, the two fought together at the forefront of the early Great Crusade. The Emperor was said to have strongly disliked using virus bombs during the Great Crusade. The Emperor protected Horus during the Siege of Reillis while Horus repaid the favour during the Battle of Gorro. During the Battle of Gyros-Thravian, the Emperor slew the mighty Ork Warboss Gharkul Blackfang after it had held off three of his Primarchs.

Some 200 years into the Great Crusade, the Emperor decided to return to Terra and placed Horus in charge of the military advancement of his Imperium in his stead, granting him the title of Warmaster after the Ullanor Crusade, the Emperor declared that the time had come for his sons to show him what great leaders they were. Turning his back on direct military interventions, the Emperor then created the Council of Terra, the Imperial Tithe and expanded the civil governing bodies of the Imperium, before retiring in seclusion beneath the Imperial Palace to begin work upon his next great ambition, the Webway Project. At some point, the Emperor left the Palace to decree the Edict of Nikea, forbidding the use of Librarians within the Astartes Legions.

### The Horus Heresy

This turn of events did not please all of the Emperor's subjects, several of his sons in particular. In the final stages of the Great Crusade, the Emperor's most trusted son Horus succumbed to Chaos temptation. Horus was told that the reason the Emperor had left the Great Crusade was so he could attempt to reach godhood, abandon all his sons and betray one of the central tenets of the Great Crusade (to enlighten humanity and free it from the bonds of false gods). Horus saw it as his duty to save the Imperium and turned on his father. Having corrupted fully half of the Space Marine Legions, Horus led them against the Emperor and plunged the fledgling galactic empire into a colossal civil war. This became the most terrible conflict in human history, and billions perished as the Traitor Legions tore apart the empire they had helped to forge. The Emperor's son Magnus attempted to warn his father of the coming slaughter, but his telepathic message breached the Emperor's psychic wardings at the Imperial Palace and caused a grievous malfunction in the Golden Throne. Distraught, the Emperor ignored Magnus' warning and banished his son from his sight. The Emperor then dispatched the Space Wolves under Leman Russ to bring back Magnus before him in chains. However the now-corrupted Horus intercepted the Emperor's order and changed it, instead ordering the Thousand Sons destroyed.

#### Magnus' Folly

For the rest of the Heresy, the Emperor was forced to deal with the Golden Throne's malfunction, which created a Warp Breach in the depths of the Imperial Palace. As Daemons flooded through the breach, the Custodian Guard and Sisters of Silence held them at bay while the Emperor punishingly exerted himself on the Golden Throne to prevent all of Terra itself from being swallowed. With his attentions turned to this crisis, the Emperor left management of Horus' rebellion to Malcador and Rogal Dorn. During this sad state of affairs, the Emperor engaged in telepathic communications with the lowly Astropath Kai Zulane, who had been given a vision of the Heresy's conclusion. During their psychic communiques, the Emperor revealed he not only already knew his ultimate fate, but had accepted it.

Later Corax, distraught over the disaster on Isstvan V, arrived at the Emperor's palace and demanded audience with the Emperor. Diverting some of his attention from the strenuous task of maintaining the Golden Throne, the Emperor psychically imbued part of the secrets of creating Astartes into his son's mind. Thus, Corax was able to begin rebuilding the Raven Guard.

After five years of maintaining the stability of Magnus' Webway breach on the Golden Throne, the Emperor began to exhibit physical fatigue. He finally began to show signs of exhaustion and his nose would bleed, even in the telepathic visions he sent to his Custodian Tribune Ra Endymion. After sensing the birth of the powerful Daemon Drach'nyen in the Warp the Emperor knew the war in the Webway was reaching its climax and the fate of mankind would soon be decided. He ordered the Sisters of Silence to gather a thousand psykers across the Galaxy and sacrifice them to the Golden Throne. This allowed the Throne to be powered for a single day without the Emperor's presence, and he used that time to plunge into the Webway and rescue the retreating Imperial forces. After sweeping aside the Daemonic hordes he confronted Drach'nyen and sealed it into the body of Ra Endymion, telling him to run as far as he could into the depths of the Webway in order to keep humanity safe from its influence. Afterwards the Emperor was forced to seal the Webway portal on Terra by again becoming a prisoner to the Golden Throne. The Emperor lamented that his great work was ruined and maintained that now that the Webway Project had failed, humanity was ultimately doomed. Horus would be defeated by his hands, but someone else would take his place. To the shock of his Custodian Diocletian, the Emperor declared the Imperium ultimately doomed, be it in a year or ten thousand, and for the first time admitted he did not know what to do.

Shortly before the Siege of Terra, the Emperor appeared before the nine chosen champions of Malcador's Knights-Errant. The Master of Mankind stated that while his original Space Marines were built to wage war in the Material, these new chosen must build a new order to wage war against the immaterial. Their fight against Horus was over, but their mission to come would nonetheless be necessary for the survival of humanity. The Emperor revealed he was initially hesitant to fight against these forces directly, seeking instead to contain it. However Malcador was eventually able to convince him that direct action was needed. After telling them of their role, the Emperor bid them farewell as Malcador's confidant Ael Wyntor created a portal to Titan.

#### Siege of Terra

As Horus besieged the Sol System in the Materium, so did the Ruinous Powers assail the Imperium in the Immaterium. The Emperor alone held back the tides of the Warp from the Sol System. During these struggles, he often took the form of a prehistoric, weary, old man in a fur coat huddled over a dying fire. As Horus finally arrived in the Sol System he appeared to the Emperor as a feral wolf, goading the Emperor and declaring him a tyrant and liar. The Emperor refused to even respond to Horus in these exchanges, looking past him to instead announce his rejection of the Ruinous Powers and declaring their puppet as nothing. As the embers of his fire died, the shadows around him drew closer and closer. As Horus arrived directly over Terra, the fire finally died and Horus gloated that the only option left for his father was to run. In the early stages of the Siege of Terra the Emperor was confined to the Throne, maintaining a psychic barrier that kept Daemons from manifesting on Terra. The barrier was so strong that even the Daemon Primarchs were unable to penetrate it. The traitors were eventually able to overcome the barrier through a warp ritual involving the mass sacrifice of lives on Terra, though even then its remaining power kept the likes of Angron from being able to fly past the walls of the Imperial Palace.

During the Siege, the Emperor deliberately allowed Magnus the Red to infiltrate the Imperial Palace. Deep inside the Imperial Dungeon, a projection of the Emperor dubbed Revelation confronted Magnus and his men in the Hall of Victories. Revelation led them to the Throne Room, where Magnus came before the Emperor on the Golden Throne. Determined to go through with his vow to slay his father, Magnus obliterated the projection of Revelation and powered up his staff to deliver a killing blow to the Emperor upon the Golden Throne. However, before he could execute the act he was blocked by Vulkan as his Thousand Sons engaged in battle with Vulkan's Draakward and Bjarki’s pack. The Emperor's eyes suddenly opened, and Magnus found himself floating through the ether with his father and witnessing the rise and fall of the Galaxy's many empires. The Emperor showed Magnus a future where the Primarchs never turned against the Imperium and the last world in the Galaxy was conquered in the name of mankind. In this future Magnus sat upon the Golden Throne to power the Imperial Webway, but his soul was in perpetual bliss as it drifted in the Immaterium along with the Emperor to discover the limits of cosmic knowledge. The Emperor stated that this future may yet happen, and Magnus could return to the loyalists' side at the head of a new legion being prepared for him. Together, the Emperor and Magnus would expel the traitors from Terra and undertake the Great Scouring. However, the price was steep, for the Emperor declared the Thousand Sons damned due to rampant flesh change. They could not follow Magnus back into the Emperor's embrace, and would need to be purged. This price was too much for Magnus to bear, and he again struck at the Emperor but found himself in battle with Vulkan, who eventually managed to chase the Crimson King from the Throne Room.

#### Death

Mere hours after Sanguinius made his heroic stand at the Eternity Gate and Rogal Dorn's own command centre fell to traitor forces, Horus mysteriously lowered the Void Shields to his own flagship, the *Vengeful Spirit*. Malcador soon told the Emperor of this development, finally rousing the Master of Mankind. The Emperor gathered his remaining loyal generals to him: Sanguinius, Dorn, Vulkan, and Constantin Valdor and against all of their objections announced his plans to teleport to the *Vengeful Spirit* and end his treacherous son once and for all. However, Vulkan was to stay behind and oversee the failsafe on the Golden Throne, while Sanguinius would lead the loyalist armies on Terra. However, the Blood Angels Primarch refused to obey this order, confronting his father as he donned his golden armour. Sanguinius finally told the Emperor of his prophetic death at Horus' hands and his intention to defy fate by defeating his traitorous brother instead. This was enough to move the Emperor to change his mind, as he had sought to change his own fate many times in the past. Unknown to the loyalists but already discovered by Horus, Guilliman's reinforcements were just 9 hours away.

Dubbing the assault Operation *Anabasis*, Horus used his abilities to scatter the attackers throughout the *Vengeful Spirit*. The Emperor and his Custodes appeared in a seemingly ordinary hangar until Horus used his dark powers to take control of many of the Companions. Blood flowing from their eyes and screaming at the effort to maintain control, dozens of the Emperor's own bodyguards attacked their liege-lord. The Emperor reluctantly slew dozens of Custodes before the madness passed and he was able to cleanse the lingering taint from his companions. The Emperor and his Custodes then found themselves in the midst of Hell, with many of the warriors falling into daemonic traps until the Emperor unleashed the same psychic fire he had stolen from the Gods of Chaos to cleanse them. Horus revealed that he had held back the full measure of his strength in order to draw the Emperor in, but the Master of Mankind was undeterred by the madness unleashed on the *Vengeful Spirit* and announced that he was to bring death to Horus.

After the Emperor felt the true extent of Horus' power as he rushed to face him aboard the *Vengeful Spirit*, He realised that victory would be unlikely unless he empowered Himself greatly. Out of desperation, the Emperor drank from the Warp on a scale previously unseen. Taking the form of a lightning-sheathed sphere of obsidian, the Emperor's power was such that he even unintentionally slew all of the Custodians around him, turning them into little more than heavily burnt walking corpses. The Emperor proceeded to sweep across the madness of the Inevitable City, causing Daemons, the Lost and the Damned and even Traitor Space Marines to flee in panic before him. Only his Custodian Proconsul Caecaltus Dusk survived the Emperor's presence, apparently due to an earlier blessing by Malcador.

By now, the Emperor was ascending into a full Chaos God, though he believed the action was necessary in order to kill Horus and save Humanity. Malcador was distressed at sensing what his friend had become, believing he had gone too far. However, it was then that the Emperor was confronted by Ollanius Persson, John Grammaticus, Leetu, and Garviel Loken. Persson confronted his old friend, talking him down from the abyss of corruption by reminding him of his humanity. Shocked that he had encountered Persson for the first time in millennia at this specific place at this specific time, Persson convinced the Emperor to have faith and give up the power he had built up even if it meant gambling Humanity's future in a battle he was likely not to win. This ultimately convinced the Emperor to shed the mantle of the evolving Dark King, causing a blast of power to sweep across both Terra and the *Vengeful Spirit* that banished much of the Warp-madness spread by the traitors.

The Emperor then let out an announcement across the *Vengeful Spirit* for all remaining companions to join him in the final battle to kill Horus, a battle he was no longer certain to win. However, according to Malcador, casting aside the power of the Dark King separated the Emperor from the last portion of his soul that contained compassion. Malcador hopes that one day, the Emperor may recover the fragment.

The Emperor eventually reached Horus in Lupercal's Court, finding the strung up body of Sanguinius. Ignoring the Warmaster's taunts, he spoke directly to the Gods of Chaos and defied them. In the ensuing battle with Horus, the Emperor and his son battled both physically and in the metaphysical realms of time and space. However, despite his best efforts, even the Emperor was no match for Horus' warp-infused might and he was repeatedly struck down and grievously wounded by his treacherous son. Both Caecaltus Dusk and Ollanius Persson gave their lives protecting the Emperor from the monstrous Horus. In the end, the Emperor tricked Horus with a illusion of Garviel Loken to convince Horus to temporarily abandon his warp powers and deliver the final blow to the Emperor as a mere Primarch in order to demonstrate that he was not a slave to Chaos. The ruse gave the Emperor the opportunity he needed to launch a final attack on the temporarily weakened Horus and as he fell into agony, Horus, free from the powers of Chaos for a mere moment, begged his father to kill him. The Emperor initially hesitated but granted his son the gift of mercy with the Athame blade he had received from Ollanius Persson. Before obliterating Horus, the Emperor stated that He forgave him and would wait for him.

In the aftermath of the battle, the Emperor immediately collapsed and was discovered by Dorn and Valdor. In part guided by an Tarot card, *The Throne*, the two agreed to return him to the Golden Throne. Before being placed upon the Throne by Dorn and Vulkan, the Emperor, with perhaps a look of terror in his remaining eye, ushered only a single word. It may have been "now", while Dorn also speculates that it may have also been "no". Upon the Golden Throne, the Emperor has sat in silence for the last 10,000 years.

## Transcendence

Enthroned within the life-sustaining Golden Throne, the Emperor's will has transcended his maimed body. The Emperor is now divorced from the day-to-day running of the Imperium; this is left to the Adeptus Terra who govern in his name.

Now, his will is interpreted and executed by the High Lords of Terra, his worship is regulated by the Ecclesiarchy, his law enforced by the Adeptus Arbites, his form guarded by the Adeptus Custodes, and his people protected from the horrors of the Galaxy and from even themselves by the Inquisition. The Emperor is confined within the Golden Throne, vast biomechanical machinery forming the great Sanctum Imperialis, located deep within the continent-spanning complex on Terra known as the Imperial Palace. There the Emperor's physical form is sustained by carefully maintained machinery. Physically, the enthroned Emperor of Mankind is a ravaged corpse. The last surviving cells in his shattered body are sustained by the Golden Throne, providing an anchor for the Emperor's spirit, which extends across the entire Imperium.

### The Unspoken Sanction

The Emperor can no longer eat, drink, nor breathe as men do. His body has grown beyond these needs. The Adeptus Terra itself acknowledges and teaches that his is a "divine corpse". The Emperor on the Golden Throne can only continue to function through the daily sacrifice of thousands of Psykers. For the Emperor, it is the life-force, the souls, of psychic humans which can sustain him and it is stated his appetite is "great and insatiable". It is a sacrifice which first begun during the Horus Heresy, known as the "Unspoken Sanction." Since that time, the Inquisition scours the Imperium tirelessly for emergent psykers, who are too vulnerable to be left alone. Though some will be recruited into the Adeptus Astronomica or the Adeptus Astra Telepathica, many more serve a gruesome fate - given up to the weird machinery that surrounds the Emperor. Their souls are gradually leeched to feed the Emperor's spirit. It is a process that, to Skoia - the first victim of Unspoken Sanction - was like a slow and painful asphyxiation:

Her breaths no longer come, and that only amplifies her silent cry. She slumps forwards, cheek pressed to the unbreakable glass, her lips trembling, her eyes wide and shivering. The stiller she becomes, the darker her sight falls, the louder she screams inside her skull. And now, only now, does she hear the melody of the other souls of the one thousand sharing the same fate, suffering what she suffers. Their screams and prayers and panic and fears entwine, unseen by all, and form one sound, one impossibly perfect note. Those outside the coffins may yet hear it, but its true purity is unheard by any but the dying souls themselves. It is the very first note in a song that will last ten thousand years, and perhaps beyond. She, Skoia, is its first singer."

— Skoia, the first psyker to die in sacrifice to the Emperor, during the Horus Heresy

The Adeptus Terra teaches that the sorrow and slaughter that feeds the Emperor's divine corpse is a small price to pay for the survival of the species. Left uncontrolled, the emerging race of psychic humanity would become the vehicle for its destruction, the inexperienced psykers not only being fed upon for their life-force by foul aliens but also used as as a means to open up warp portals. Furthermore, all ship travel in the Imperium would grind to a halt without the guiding light of the Emperor and the Astronomican. The Emperor knows that to protect his species, he must survive - forever if necessary, until such a time as psychic humans have evolved sufficient strength to withstand the dangers they face. Though thousands must endure pain and death for his sake, the Emperor's own agony is considerable - for he is a creature whose body is all but destroyed, with a mind encased inside a rotting shell and whose every thought is enslaved to the task of serving mankind.

Only through his power can the Astronomican beam its guiding light, allowing Imperial ships to navigate the Warp in relative safety. The Emperor is not just a beacon for space travel, however, but is said to continue to guide Humanity through his Tarot, and through dreams and visions given to selected individuals. It is also popularly believed that he created the warp storm known as the Storm of the Emperor's Wrath during the Age of Apostasy, and that the Emperor's will holds Chaos at bay. Were it not for his unceasing struggle, the Chaos of the Warp would flood the material realm with madness and horror, causing untold destruction. In addition, the Emperor's presence on the Golden Throne keeps the ruptured Webway portal beneath the Imperial Palace in check. Should it again open, Terra would become flooded by Daemons. In addition to these already profound powers, the Emperor is capable of stopping time for undetermined lengths and guiding his servants through manipulation of his Tarot and sheer influence.

### Intervention by the Emperor

Since his internment on the Golden Throne barring a few, brief, semi-coherent periods at first, the Emperor has not physically moved nor spoken in 10,000 years. He has however, spoken and intervened (or in some cases, appears to have) by other means:

Shortly before his own death Konrad Curze spoke to a corpse-puppet of the Emperor he had created. Shockingly, the grotesque work of art began speaking back and shone with blinding light. The voice stated that Curze had acted as intended and like all the Primarchs had been built for a specific purpose, but Chaos had interfered with his plans in the end. At the same time, the voice scolded Curze for believing that fate was absolute and instead blamed the Primarch's own choices for what would soon befall him. The conversation sent Curze into a frenzy and he tore the corpse-puppet to pieces, and it is unknown if this was a mere hallucination or indeed the actual voice of the Emperor.

One of the few conversations between an Imperial subject and the immobilised Emperor occurred at the end of the 41st Millennium. Following the Terran Crusade, the reborn Roboute Guilliman stood before the Golden Throne and communed with the Emperor. The Primarch was disturbed by what had become of his father's mental state. He felt that the Emperor had lost all pretenses of humanity and gave off an overwhelming sense of coldness. The Emperor greeted Guilliman with interest, but as a creator would a long-lost tool, not as a father would with his son. Guilliman feared that the centuries of suffering had stripped away whatever warmth and humanity he once had. What exactly transpired in the Throne Room is unclear, with both Guilliman and Captain-General Trajann Valoris having no memory of what exactly took place. Apparently, during their conversation, the Emperor called Guilliman both a tool and his son and the last hope to save Mankind. He assaulted Guilliman's mind with an overload of information and dark truths of the Galaxy before going silent once more.

During the Plague Wars the Emperor would seemingly intervene through Militant-Apostolic Mathieu in order to both destroy a portion of the Cauldron of Nurgle on Iax as well as to resurrect Guilliman, who had been slain by Mortarion via the disease known as the Godblight. Channeling his power through Guilliman, the Emperor unleashed a mighty blow through the Immaterium which damaged the Garden of Nurgle and the Plague God directly. Before dying, Mathieu came to believe that the Great Rift was now empowering the Emperor, who was close to reawakening. Guilliman seemed to believe the Priest and began to dabble with Belisarius Cawl on ideas on how to bring back his father.

### The God Emperor

In the present day Era Indomitus, many Imperials believe the Emperor is essentially a god, or at least close enough by their own reckoning for it to not matter. Even those who have defected from the Imperial Creed may acknowledge this. He is, however, not the only god; by the same logic that marks his apparent divinity, so too are the primordial Dark Gods true in their divinity, alongside other emergent warp entities.

### Possibility of Return

The majority within the Inquisition attest for a variety of reasons that the return of the Emperor of mankind would have negative outcomes for the Imperium, from the potential for cataclysmic disruption of the Astronomican and the exposure of Humanity to the perils from which he protects them, to the potential for intercene conflict between believers and nonbelievers, to the weakness of a mortal form and the potential for true death. Nontheless, there are several factions within the Imperium which concern themselves with the potential restoration of the Emperor, each with their own theories on his possible rebirth. The Inquisition typologizes these approaches into two greater philosophies: resurrectionism and incarnationism. In all cases there is wide disagreement in approach, and the inquisition has decreed that several of these methodologies should be considered complete fabrication brought about by Tzeentchian Cultists and the lies of Chaos.

#### Resurrectionist Approaches

Resurrectionists hold that the emperor himself could one day rise bodily from the Golden Throne, and concern themselves with the means by which that could be accomplished. Resurrectionism has its roots in the earlist days after the Horus Heresy, although it saw a period of disfavor during the Age of Apostasy.

##### Golden Throne

As the Emperor is entombed within the Golden Throne several factions within the Inquisition believe that, with the proper understanding of the principles of departing souls the working of the throne might be altered such that the Emperor's soul could be restored to his body, and that with the proper understanding of the Emperor's body that it too might be restored to the state that it might be able to once more sustain his soul.

Chief among these are ghouls and ravens of the Revivificators, who have learned from from the study of the Psychic-Engineering of the Eldar the principles of the capture of departing souls – and whose least scrupulous members have even attempted to recreate the practice by which Haemonculi ready a corpse for the reinfusion of a soul and return those souls from the Warp. It was for this reason that, when the Golden Throne grew hungry during the Time of Ending three of the High Lords of Terra sought a Dark Eldar Haemonculus to repair the throne.

##### Sensei

The secret society which call themselves the Illuminati have learned from the Black Library of the Eldar many truths of the nature of Chaos, of the Emperor's immortal children the Sensei, and came to the horrifying realization: that the Emperor cannot survive in his current state forever and were he to fail, that without the Emperor, Mankind will quickly fall to Chaos as the ancient Eldar did: tearing open the materium and creating a Fifth God of Chaos.

The Illuminati believe if they can find and gather the Sensei while protecting them from the Inquisition, and deceive them into preparing for "the final war with Chaos" where they would be simultaneously sacrificed the Golden Throne that the Emperor will be renewed, reborn as the "Sensei-Emperor" to again lead his race in person.

#### Incarnationist Approaches

Incarnationists believe that the soul of emperor should be allowed to, or perhaps already has, enter the Warp to be reincarnated in a new form. Incarnationism is a relatively new political philosophy, finding its roots among the Thorians which formed in late M36 in awe of Sebastian Thor's rebellion against Goge Vandire.

##### Star Child

The Star Child is the Warp Entity comprised of the portions of humanity within the Emperor's soul that remained whole, having reformed after being cast adrift in the Warp and dissolved into the flow of energy, now waiting to be reincarnated. The existence of the Star Child is anathema to the humans of the Imperium as the Emperor's body continues to live, and knowledge of its existence is considered dangerous heresy.

The Star Child influences the Materium through its connection to the Emperor's immortal descendants known as the Sensei, to whom it bestows its own mark and rewards akin to a Chaos God and ultimately draws their souls bodily through the Warp to join its own in divine apotheosis.

The Inquisitorial faction of Ardentites hold that evidence of divine influence found throughout humanity is evidence that the Emperor will not return in body but by suffusing his presence throughout Humanity. Following the Psychic Awakening, visions of a golden infant and a radiant being rising from a throne of light were reported across Astropathic relay networks originating from the Segmentum Solar.

##### God Incarnate

The **God Incarnate** is a resurrectionist concept closely connected to the philosophies of Thorian Inquisitors which espouses that the Emperor's essence in the Warp may be transferred to a physical vessel, the **Divine Avatar**: a living being into which he invests his might to live anew and embodied.

There are several Inquisition philosophies which have evolved around resurrection through the God Incarnate including the Thorians who believe an especially pious body could be made hold the soul of the emperor, the heretical Horusians who believe that Chaos might be capable of producing such a body (and that Horus could have served as such a vessel), and the Anomolian Beholders who diregard the others as hubristic and believe a Divine Avatar will arise amongst humanity to those who follow the appropriate signs: a Witch of great power who appears under tumultuous circumstances confirmed through miracles and portents.

## Appearance

Before he was trapped atop the Golden Throne, the Emperor could appear to any individual however he wanted, each person perceiving him differently. The Emperor has appeared as male or female, or neither, as an elderly man or a child, as a peasant, king, magician and a fool. None has ever seen his true face.

* To most, and in most depictions of him, the Emperor appears as a giant of a man clad in golden armour with long brown hair, a square jaw, and a stern demeanour. He often has an angelic halo surrounding his head. This form was a Golden giant that was meant to appeal to the warrior instincts of the Primarchs and inspire the teeming masses of the Imperium to fight for him. According to Malcador, the Emperor disliked this form and sought to abandon it upon leaving the Great Crusade.
* When he appeared to Ezekiel Sedayne, prior to the Unification Wars, he appeared as a man in rich clothes. His hair was brown, long, and clean. The Emperor's face was both youthful and old. His eyes were placid brown and deeper than time. When speaking to Ezekiel, Ezekiel states that he looks different than when he appeared to the people. The Emperor states that he does change his appearance sometimes, but claimed that his appearance to Ezekiel was "truthful".
* When he spoke to Belisarius Cawl, through Ezekiel's memory, he appeared unremarkable. He had his hair tied back. The Emperor wore a scientist's lab coat and was not tall, yet not short. He was handsome, but not outrageously so. He was slight, but not thin.
* During the Unification Wars on Terra, the Emperor appeared to Uriah Olathaire, the priest of the Church of the Lightning Stone. He first appeared as a tall man with a remarkably unremarkable face that was stern, but not unkind, and seemed at odds with his "martial bearing". His skin was leathery and tanned, his hair dark and pulled back into a short scalp-lock. He then presented himself as towering, with an ebony face, long dark hair, clad in his golden power armour, and radiating light bright enough to illuminate the darkened interior of the church.
* When Arkhan Land met the Emperor at one of his labs on Terra, during the Great Crusade, Arkhan saw the Emperor as a scientist, clad as any scientist might be clad, in a protective hazard suit suitable for work in sterile and hostile conditions, and a surgical mask. The Emperor's surgical gloves had minute circuitry on the fingertips which generated an aura of ultrasound. The gloves would transmit crude internal scans of the body of whomever he was touching to nearby cogitator screens.
* When Corvus Corax first met the Emperor, the Emperor appeared to be "unremarkable." His height and build were both average. He had dark hair, moderately tanned skin. His eyes were indistinct, a mixture of blue, green, grey, and brown; with a wisdom, kindness, and antiquity that reached into Corvus's soul. He was dressed in an unadorned white linen robe, wearing a golden necklace with a pendant depicting an eagle with outspread wings and a lightning bolt held in its talons.
* When Lion El'Jonson sees the Emperor, he appears as a hooded figure, armoured in emerald plate, inscrutable with gilt and filigree and shrouded in robes of gold, wreathed in obscuring light. The Lion feels that this appearance is the "truth".
* When he first appeared before Leman Russ, the Emperor appeared as a great warrior clad in cloaks and runes. He was fond of games and challenges and bested Russ in combat but failed in drinking and eating contests.
* When he first appeared before Vulkan, the Emperor took the form of a humble pale man in outlandish clothing, known as **The Outlander**.
* During the War in the Webway, when the Emperor appeared on the field of battle, he appeared as "one born in the wild lands of Ancient Eurasia". His skin was "a Terran blend of bronze and burnt umber". His eyes were described as darker than his skin. His hair darker than his other features. His hair was pulled back with a simple golden circlet. Clad in his golden armour, more ancient and advanced than even the Custodes' battle plate, a flowing red cloak, armed with his ornate bolter and his sword.
* Due to their Blank nature, the Sisters of Silence see none of the splendor of the Emperor. During the War Within the Webway, the Sister of Silence Kaeria Casryn saw the Emperor for what he truly was: a simple man, no more or less, in perpetual agony upon the Golden Throne. His mouth open in a silent scream, the pain of his efforts seeming to age his ageless face. While he wore his golden armour, he had no psychic corona and no golden halo.

### Wargear

* The One True Armour
* The Emperor's Sword
* The Emperor's Lightning Claw
* The Emperor's Bolter
* The Emperor's Shield
* The Apollonian Spear (gifted to Constantin Valdor)
* The Dionysian Spear (gifted to Leman Russ)

## Names, Nicknames, & Titles

It is stated by Malcador the Sigillite that none has seen the Emperor's true form or known his true name (including Malcador himself). However, known identities include:

* The **Emperor of Mankind** — The title he created upon beginning to reunify Humanity on the Great Crusade, taking the form of a Golden Giant.
* The **God-Emperor of Mankind** — After the Horus Heresy, the citizens of the Imperium, the Adeptus Ministorum, came to worship him as a god. 
* The **Master of Mankind**
* The **Master of a Million Worlds**
* **Him on Earth** (alternatively, **Him on Terra**)
* The **Omnissiah** — The Mechanicus believe him to be the physical avatar of the Machine God.
* The **Allfather** — The title used by the Space Wolves and their successor chapters.
* **The Outlander** — Title he took appearing before Vulkan in the Promethean Opus
* The **False Emperor** — By Chaos Space Marines and Cultists
* The **Carrion Lord** — By Chaos Space Marines
* The **Anathema** — The term used by the Daemons of the Warp
* **Ipsissimus the Oathbreaker** - name given by Kairos Fateweaver[Note 8]
* **Master of the Lines** — A title that he was known as before Unification Wars.
* **Revelation** — The name he took in his discussion with Uriah Olathaire.
* **Neoth** — Name the Emperor had given himself in ancient Terra's past. This is the name Erda knew him by.
* **Alysaundr** - A great conqueror in Terra's distant past who wept when he realized there were no more worlds left to conquer.[Note 5]
* One who was Meek to inherit the Earth[Note 7]

## Images

### Miniatures

## Related Videos

## Trivia

|  |  |
| --- | --- |

* The first mention of the Emperor is in *Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader* (1987), which was the very first WH40K book. In that book, he is described as the very first human psyker. His corpse-like condition and consequential confinement to life-support is described as the result of "the strain of his constant vigilance." Although physically paralysed, the Emperor is still capable of communicating and issuing orders. The Master of the Inquisition reports directly to the Emperor and relays the Emperor's orders to the rest of the Inquisition.
* Note 1: The diorama of the Emperor, as seen in White Dwarf October 2019, was a golden demon entry made using parts from the Age of Sigmar Nagash miniature.
* Note 2: The image of the Emperor on the wall behind Marneus Calgar is likely inspired/based on the image of the Emperor from Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader Feasibly, it is possible it may even represent Calgar having an "actual" image Emperor (that is, a portrait or even a pict from the Golden Throne, rather than an Imperial artist's or propaganda imagined image of the Emperor).
* Note 3: In real world history, of the earliest civilizations to appear upon the banks of the Sakarya River were the ancient Hittites.
* Note 4: The exact identity of this 'First City' is not stated in sources. For comparison, Ollanious Pious was roughly 45,000 years old "give or take" by the time of the Horus Heresy, which would place his birth around 15,000 B.C. in the city of Nineveh. In the real world, however, there are many cities much older than Nineveh, such as Damascus.
* Note 5: One of the Emperor's past identities is stated to be Alysaundr, who wept upon the River Hyphasis when he discovered "there were no more worlds to conquer". This is a likely reference to a quote given by a character in the 1988 film *Die Hard* which is falsely attributed to Alexander the Great.
* Note 6: Gog is likely a reference to the Biblical Gog and Magog
* Note 7: The Emperor as "one who was meek to inherit the earth" is a likely reference to a Biblical passage attributed to Jesus Christ.
* Note 8: A likely reference to a magical state listed in the works of Aleister Crowley
* Note 9: It is unclear if by "their race" the Shamans refer to themselves as psychic Shamans, or to mankind as a whole.

## See also

* The Dark King — Theoretical fifth Chaos God, at one time destined to arise from the Emperor of Mankind.
