# Roboute Guilliman

> Quelle: [https://wh40k.lexicanum.com/wiki/Roboute_Guilliman](https://wh40k.lexicanum.com/wiki/Roboute_Guilliman) — Lexicanum (CC BY-SA). Auszug für private Kampagnen-Vorbereitung.

*"They shall be pure of heart and strong of body, untainted by doubt and unsullied by self-aggrandisement. They will be bright stars on the firmament of battle, Angels of Death whose shining wings bring swift annihilation to the enemies of Man."*

— Primarch of the Ultramarines, Roboute Guilliman

| --- | --- |
| ***Roboute Guilliman*** | |
| **Title(s)** | Avenging Son  Victorious  Master of Ultramar  Blade of Unity  Uniter |
| **Homeworld** | Macragge, Ultramar |
| **Born** | c. Late M30, Terra, Sol System |
| **Active Period** | M30-M31, M41-Present |
| **Species** | Human |
| **Type** | Primarch |
| **Relatives** | * Emperor of Mankind (Genetic Father) * Erda (Genetic Mother) * Konor Guilliman (Adoptive Father) * Tarasha Euten (Adoptive Mother) * The Primarchs (Genetic Brothers) * Ultramarines (Genetic Sons) |
| **Occupation(s)** | * Sole Consul of Macragge (Formerly) * Lord Macragge (Formerly) * Master of Ultramar * Primarch of the XIII Legion * Lord Warden of Imperium Secundus (Briefly) * Lord Commander of the Imperium (Late Horus Heresy, later Era Indomitus) * Lord Regent of the Imperium (Great Scouring, later Era Indomitus) |
| **Affiliation(s)** | * Macragge * Realm of Ultramar * Imperium of Man   + Ultramarines (XIII Legion)   + 12th Expedition Fleet (Formerly)   + Grand Council of Reconstruction   + High Lords of Terra   + Fleet Primus (Era Indomitus) * Imperium Secundus (Briefly) |
| **Preceded by** | * Rogal Dorn (as Lord Commander of the Imperium, Horus Heresy) * Malcador (as First Lord of Terra, Horus Heresy) |

**Roboute Guilliman** (ruh-BOO-tay GIL-uh-mun or /ɹɒbˈuːt ˈɡuːlɪmæn/ (rahb•oot gool•ih•man)), also known as the **Avenging Son**, the **Victorious**, the **Master of Ultramar** and the **Blade of Unity,** is one of the genetic "sons" of the Emperor of Mankind, the Primarch of the Ultramarines, his own genetic "sons". An accomplished warlord and diplomat who ruled his own empire before rediscovery by the Emperor, Guilliman was unique among his brother Primarchs in that he saw himself as not only a warrior but also a builder of civilizations. In addition to his leadership of the largest Space Marine Legion during the Great Crusade, Guilliman became renowned for his efforts to preserve the Imperium in the aftermath of the devastating Horus Heresy, becoming Lord Commander of the Imperium. Among his most noteworthy achievements is the authoring of the Codex Astartes and the creation of the modern Imperial military structure.

Shortly after the Thirteenth Black Crusade Roboute Guilliman was restored from his wounds, and now once again leads the Imperium as its Lord Commander and Imperial Regent, the living voice of the Emperor.

## History

### Youth

Like the other Primarchs, Roboute Guilliman was one of twenty genetically engineered "sons" of the Emperor of Mankind. Like all his "brothers," Roboute was taken as an infant by the powers of Chaos, and sent to a far-flung world in an effort to prevent the coming Age of the Imperium. Guilliman's capsule fell on the planet of Macragge. Roboute's arrival on the plantet was a time of portents with many reported strange sights heralding his arrival. Most notably Konor Guilliman, one of the two governing Consuls of Maccrage, dreamed of the Emperor before finding himself near Hera's Falls in the Valley of Laponis. Upon awakening, Konor assembled his bodyguard and rode to the place of his vision. There they found the capsule and the child within, surrounded by a glowing aura. Konor adopted the infant as his son and named him Roboute, meaning "Great One". Guilliman would also be raised by Konor's Seneschal, Tarasha Euten, a strong-willed and capable woman.

Roboute was a prodigy, growing fast in both body and intellect. By age ten, he had mastered every subject the wisest men of Macragge could teach him, and his insights into matters of history, philosophy, and science often stunned his elders. However, his greatest talents were as a military leader. These talents led his father to give him command of an expeditionary force to Illyrium, a mountainous region in the far north of Macragge, whose wild inhabitants had terrorized the civilised regions for years and successfully resisted every previous military campaign. Not only did Roboute fight a brilliant campaign but he also earned the respect of the wildmen who never again threatened the more civilised parts of Macragge.

While the history books state Guilliman militarily subdued the Illyrians, the reality was more complicated. Rather than engage in a protracted mountain guerrilla war, he simply occupied the Illyrians sacred shrines. This caused the Illyrians to surge forth to meet his armies, but rather than crush them then and there he challenged their Chieftain to battle. During the duel, Guilliman only defended himself from his foes blows but never launched his own attacks. The Chieftain eventually exhausted himself, but rather than slay his enemy Guilliman instead presented him with the Illyrians most sacred religious artifact, which centuries before the Consuls of Macragge had stolen. Guilliman's act of diplomacy and humanity convinced the Illyrian Chieftain to halt his campaign, seeking to become a just lord like Guilliman instead. It was at this moment that Tarasha Euten realized Guilliman had proven himself a true King.

On his return to the capital Roboute found the city in chaos, as his father's co-Consul, Gallan, had attempted a coup. Gallan led a faction of Macragge's nobility who were used to enjoying their wealth and position at the expense of armies of slaves, and resented Konor's legislation favoring the common people, among whom he was immensely popular. Approaching the city, Roboute and his soldiers saw the city in chaos, being sacked by mobs of Gallan's men, while the Consul House was under siege. Roboute left his men to restore order to the city, while he rushed to the Consul House and lifted the siege, only to find his father close to death, surrounded by his loyal bodyguards. He had been mortally wounded by an assassin in Gallan's employ, and with his dying breath, told Roboute who was responsible. Roboute swiftly crushed the rebellion and, amid a wave of popular relief, assumed the title of sole Consul of Macragge. He set about punishing the treachery and carrying out his father's vision. Gallan and his co-conspirators were executed, and their lands and wealth were redistributed to the people. With superhuman energy, Roboute reorganised Macragge's entire social structure, creating a meritocracy where office and honours were given to the hard-working, rather than the wealthy and influential. Under his leadership, Macragge prospered as it never had before.

### The Arrival of the Emperor

While Roboute was prosecuting his war against the Illyrian rebels, the Emperor of Mankind and his armies had reached the neighboring planet of Espandor. It was there that the Emperor heard stories of the extraordinary son of Consul Konor, and realized that he had found one of the lost Primarchs. However, due to an unexpected warp storm, his ship was thrown far off course and by the time it reached Macragge, Roboute had been ruling for almost five years. When the Emperor reached Macragge, he found a world that was self sufficient, prosperous, with a strong and well-equipped military, and engaging in trade with nearby systems. Impressed, the Emperor assigned command of the Ultramarines Space Marine Legion to Guilliman, and relocated the Legion's forward base to Macragge.

### The Great Crusade

With the exception of the Luna Wolves, no Legion conquered as many worlds, or conquered worlds as fast, or left conquered worlds in such good state during the Great Crusade, as the Ultramarines. Whenever Guilliman liberated a world, he would not move on until he had set up a self-sufficient defense system, and left advisors behind to create industry, set up trade routes with the rest of the Imperium, and form a government whose first concern would always be the well-being of the people.

At the same time, with the help of his new advisors, Guilliman created a supremely efficient military machine on Macragge and its surrounding worlds, that provided the Ultramarines with a steady flow of new recruits. This factor, combined with Primarch's tactical skill, also allowed his sons to perform with minimal casualties, leading it to become among the largest of the Space Marine Legions. When Horus was appointed Warmaster by the Emperor, the reaction among the other Primarchs was mixed. Some supported the appointment out of affection for Horus, some opposed it, and some were cynically accepting. However, Guilliman, Rogal Dorn, and Jaghatai Khan supported the appointment, believing in their cool, rational judgment, that Horus was really the most worthy of them. For this reason, and because of their military genius, Horus valued Guilliman and Dorn as his closest advisors.

Privately, Guilliman held four of his brothers in the greatest esteem: Dorn, Sanguinius, Leman Russ, and Ferrus Manus. He referred to them as *"The Dauntless Few"*, and pronounced that he could win any war, outright, if he had any one of those four and his Legion at the Ultramarines' side. Conversely, relations between Guilliman and Lorgar became miserable after the Emperor had the Ultramarines destroy Monarchia and be present during the shaming of the Word Bearers. While Guilliman carried out these orders to the letter and appeared to be firmly supportive of the Emperor in front of Lorgar, in truth he was uncomfortable with his actions and upset that the Emperor used his legion as a tool for humiliation that drove a wedge between the Ultramarines and Word Bearers.

### The Horus Heresy

At the outbreak of the Horus Heresy, Guilliman and the Ultramarines were tricked by Horus, who sent them to the Veridian system while Horus carried out his treasonous plot. When the treachery was revealed, the Ultramarines were poorly placed to react to it.

While the Ultramarines mustered their forces at Calth, in Ultramar, they were attacked by the Word Bearers and the Legion took heavy losses. However, the Word Bearers had overlooked two major points: the unbreakable fighting spirit of the Ultramarines, and the brilliance of Guilliman's command. An attempt by Lorgar to assassinate Guilliman with a Daemon who attacked the bridge of his flagship, forcing Guilliman to be sucked into space and fight several Word Bearers without a helmet. Guilliman was eventually able to reboard his ship, and promised to hunt down and kill Lorgar for the betrayal. At the climax of the battle Guilliman ripped out one of the two hearts of Kor Phaeron, the Word Bearers commander at Calth, after he had tried to tempt Guilliman to join the Forces of Chaos.

Meanwhile Angron of the World Eaters and Lorgar of the Word Bearers had launched the Shadow Crusade on isolated worlds in Ultramar. Their plan was to destroy as much of Ultramar as they could while the Ultramarines were occupied on Calth. After the victory at Calth, Guilliman, presumably under the guidance of his newly reinstated Librarians, traveled to an isolated Warp jump point on the outer fringes of Ultramar. There he encountered Sanguinius of the Blood Angels who has just recently finished his war in the Signus cluster. The Navigators of the Blood Angels had been ordered to find the closest stable Warp zone, which many assumed would be Terra. Instead fate brought them to Ultramar. With the addition of the Blood Angels to his forces, Guilliman pronounced they could finally begin countering the Shadow Crusade. After Calth, Guilliman pursued Lorgar, who had since allied with Angron, to the world of Nuceria. There, the Ultramarines engaged both the World Eaters and Word Bearers while Guilliman himself battled Lorgar, finding the once-weaker Word Bearers Primarch to be surprisingly capable in combat. The situation for Guilliman got worse when Angron arrived, battering Guilliman with a furious assault and eventually defeating the Lord of Macragge. However as Angron was about to land the final blow, Ultramarines were able to arrive and safely retrieve their Primarch.

As a result of being cut off by the Ruinstorm created by the traitorous Word Bearers, Guilliman feared the Imperium lost and created a second empire, Imperium Secundus, as a contingency. Many loyalist brothers were brought to Macragge thanks to the activation of the xenos device known as the Pharos. Not wanting to appear vain and power-hungry like his brother Horus, Guilliman refused to declare himself Emperor of Imperium Secundus, instead initially trying to convince Lion El'Jonson to take the position despite being distrustful of the Dark Angels Primarch's motives. While organising the creation of Imperium Secundus Guilliman survived an assassin attempt by an Alpha Legion squad disguised as Aeonid Thiel and other Ultramarines. Later when Konrad Curze was let loose upon Macragge, Guilliman and the Lion battled the Night Lords Primarch together but were led into a trap. Instead of being cornered, Curze detonated charges and brought the entire structure down upon their heads. Guilliman and the Lion survived thanks to Barabas Dantioch activating the Pharos, which teleported the duo to Sotha. The Lion and Guilliman then made their way back to Macragge, where the Blood Angels had now arrived. Guilliman decided to name the reluctant Sanguinius the Regent of Imperium Secundus.

However Guilliman frequently clashed with his distrustful and taciturn brother Lion El'Jonson over policy. Obsessed with hunting for Konrad Curze on Macragge, the Lion insisted that the Night Haunter was behind rebellions plaguing the world and demanded martial law be instituted. After a suicide bombing hit an Astartes convoy on Macragge, the Dark Angels were deployed by the Lion to establish martial law without Guilliman's express permission. Guilliman and the Lion again came to disagreement over the rebellion in the Illyrium region of Macragge, with the Dark Angels primarch wishing to use weapons of mass destruction to flush them out as he suspected Curze was hiding there. Ultimately the Lion led the attack into Illyrium, and Curze was captured. At Guilliman's insistence, he was given a public trial. During the trial, Curze accused the Lion of ordering secret orbital attacks against the rebellion which enraged the Dark Angels Primarch and nearly led to him slaying Curze in the court. Guilliman and Sanguinius dismissed the Lion from Imperium Secundus as response, but later the Lion reappeared and asked to be Curze's jailer instead.

Following the Trial of Curze, Sanguinius, Lion El'Jonson, and Guilliman all agreed to try and breach the Ruinstorm to reach Terra and aid the Emperor who they now knew still lived. In the Ruinstorm, the loyalist fleet came across a variety of horrors and word of an entity spreading destruction known as the "Pilgrim". During the voyage through the Ruinstorm, Guilliman's fleet was ambushed by Traitor forces at Anuari, where the Avenging Son survived an assassination attempt by Word Bearers armed with Athame's. Believing he could study the weapons for understanding of the enemy and potentially using it against them, Guilliman kept the blades in his vault. During the Battle of Pyrrhan, Guilliman commanded the Ultramarines personnel as Sanguinius received a vision and he realized that he needed to go where this struggle had begun, Davin. Reluctantly, Guilliman and The Lion agreed to trust in Sanguinius but both had thought they would simply destroy the world upon arriving. While over Davin, Sanguinius shocked The Lion by boarding the *Invincible Reason* and taking the captive Konrad Curze with him. Sanguinius hoped to use Curze's prophetic abilities to determine what he was meant to do upon Davin. Sanguinius then commended a mass landing on the world, and the enraged Lion nearly ordered that Davin be subjected to Exterminatus regardless of Sanguinius' presence on it. After horrified Lion expressed to Guilliman that he believed something was trying to manipulate them to the path of damnation, the Ultramarine Primarch knew what he must do and crushed his captive Athame Blades with his Power Fist. He declared he would not be tempted the same way Horus had.

At Davin, Sanguinius was trapped within a portal and did battle with the Daemon Madail while Guilliman and The Lion desperately tried to reach him. a vicious battle erupted both on Davin and above it, in which Guilliman's acting flagship *Samothrace* was destroyed in orbit by the Daemonship *Veritas Ferrum*. During the battle at Davin's temple, Guilliman and The Lion managed to finally fight as brothers and together they brought down a massive Soul Grinder. Eventually, Sanguinius was able to escape and the Space Marine forces evacuated to space. Davin was destroyed by Cyclonic Torpedoes, and with its anchor gone the Daemonic fleet vanished. In the place of where Davin once was, a breach in the Ruinstorm was visible. The path led to Terra, but upon further study it became apparent that somehow Horus had foreseen this route and a large blockade was erected to block them. Guilliman and The Lion agreed to distract the blockade while Sanguinius and the Blood Angels made directly for Terra, for that was their destiny.

After the death of the Ruinstorm, Guilliman gathered whatever forces he could and made haste for Terra. In his path lay a large defensive chain of hundreds of worlds manned by the Iron Warriors. In a series of bitter engagements, both sides took heavy losses but the Ultramarines were able to maintain a steady advance.

Ultimately, Guilliman was able to set course for Holy Terra. Travelling at maximum speed, his reinforcement fleet of over 3,200 capital ships was scant hours away as The Emperor battled Horus aboard the *Vengeful Spirit*. However without the Astronomican to light the way, Guilliman's force was marooned just out of Terra's reach as at conventional speed it would take tens of thousands of years for them to eventually find the Throneworld. This situation reversed when, thanks to the effort of Euphrati Keeler and her faithful, the Astronomican was reactivated and Guilliman arrived at Terra to drive back the traitors in the wake of Horus' defeat.

Even as fighting waged in Terra's orbit and surface, Guilliman set foot on the Throneworld with the intent of gathering the remaining loyalist Primarchs and beginning the first phase of reconquest and reconstruction. To that end, he had emissaries track down Rogal Dorn, Vulkan, Jaghatai Khan, Lion El'Jonson, and Leman Russ alongside the High Lords of Terra and organised the Grand Council of Reconstruction. While Dorn, Russ, and The Lion wished to immediately launch a full crusade of vengeance against the fleeing traitors, Guilliman preferred a strategy of consolidation and securing vital assets such as Luna and Mars. Thanks to the support of the newly empowered High Lords, Guilliman's strategy prevailed and the first acts of the Great Scouring were the Retaking of Luna and Siege of Mars.

### Post-Heresy

In the aftermath of the Great Betrayal, the Emperor had been incapacitated, and the Space Marines' numbers had been decimated by defections to Chaos and battle losses. The Ultramarines were left as the largest loyal legion, and Guilliman eventually assumed the title of Lord Commander of the Imperium. For years thereafter, Guilliman deployed and led the Ultramarines throughout the galaxy, reclaiming worlds lost to Chaos and preventing the loss of still others to rebellion or invasion from outside the Imperium. At the same time, Guilliman reorganised the Space Marine Legions as Chapters and composed the Codex Astartes, the tome that the Ultramarines (and many other chapters) follow strictly.

Guilliman led the assault against the Alpha Legion on Eskrador in the aftermath of the Heresy, and due to the vanity of Alpharius, he utilised a surprise attack at the heart of the traitors and killed Alpharius in a duel. However, he and his sons were greatly mistaken in their belief that the snake would die without the head, as indeed, the Alpha Legion's symbol is a hydra, a multi-headed serpent. The Ultramarines were soundly pushed back time and again by the traitor marines, undaunted at the loss of their Primarch. Guilliman eventually pulled his forces back into orbit and bombarded the planet from above.

Sometime before the Battle of Thessala Guilliman tasked the Tech-Priest Belisarius Cawl with two deeds: the resurrection of Guilliman should he fall and the creation of a next generation of Space Marines.

Later, in the Battle of Thessala against the Emperor's Children, Guilliman would be grievously wounded. Where Alpharius had not greatly embraced the Chaos powers, and was essentially unchanged from his original Primarch form, Fulgrim had been to the Eye of Terror, reaping the terrible powers therein, and had been elevated by Slaanesh to a mighty and fell daemon prince, no longer resembling a man, but his original purity of form corrupted and augmented by the ruinous powers. Fulgrim was now a serpentine creature of immense stature, and multi-limbed. Each limb carried a poisoned sword, and in the clash he stabbed Guilliman in the neck; Guilliman was interred in a stasis field by apothecaries and remained frozen in the instant of death while Fulgrim escaped back to the Eye of Terror.

For the next ten thousand years Guilliman's mortal body remained in stasis, on the Shrine of Guilliman deep within the Temple of Correction, one of the holiest places in the entire Imperium. Some pilgrims claimed that the Primarch's wounds were slowly recovering, a feat credited to the power of the Emperor. Others deny the phenomenon, and point out the sheer impossibility of change within the stasis field. Yet enough believed the stories to come and witness for themselves the miracle of the Primarch.

### Return

#### Awakening

Shortly after Abaddon the Despoiler's Thirteenth Black Crusade and the destruction of Cadia, the Tech-Priest Belisarius Cawl and Saint Celestine led a group of Imperial survivors into the Webway with the aid of their new Eldar allies. The group arrived at Macragge, where Cawl revealed that he had in fact lived for the last ten thousand years and was ordered by Guilliman himself to complete two tasks in the event of his downfall. One of these was to revive Guilliman, a feat that Cawl could now accomplish thanks to Eldar aid. Using a suit of Power Armour that regenerated the wounds inflicted by Fulgrim, and with his soul restored to his body by Ynnead, Guilliman was restored just as Black Legion forces invaded Macragge. Reborn, Guilliman swiftly drove off the Chaos invaders before taking in the truths of the Imperium after his ten thousand year absence. Guilliman displayed several "miracles" after his rebirth, his mere presence was able to cure any afflicted with a Nurgle-created blindness-inducing illness.

Disgusted by the decay, superstition, and ignorance that surrounds the modern Imperium, Guilliman convened a war council of his Ultramarines as to what to do next. After several days he declared his intent to travel to Terra and see his father upon the Golden Throne. However Guilliman's revival had attracted the gaze of the Gods of Chaos and Daemon Primarch's, throwing the Warp into an uproar. The journey to Terra, known as the Terran Crusade, became an arduous affair that saw his fleet trapped in the Maelstrom after an ambush by Magnus and his Thousand Sons. Inside the Maelstrom the Imperial expedition was defeated by Kairos Fateweaver and the Red Corsairs, with the Primarch himself trapped in crystal chains made from his own doubts. Held by Kairos inside a Blackstone Fortress, the Imperial expedition seemed doomed. However thanks to the efforts of the Harlequin Sylandri Veilwalker and the Fallen Angel Cypher Guilliman and the rest of the surviving expedition were freed and escaped towards a Webway Portal. Guilliman held the portal long enough for his men to escape, defeating the Bloodthirster Skarbrand after witnessing the sacrifice of Marshal Amalrich.

The Imperial expedition eventually arrived through another portal on Luna, but this time were followed by Magnus and his Thousand Sons. On the surface of Luna, Magnus and Guilliman dueled as battle raged around them. Guilliman was overcome by Magnus' psychic abilities until the arrival of reinforcements from Terra that included Sisters of Silence. With Magnus' psychic abilities weakened, Guilliman was able to impale his daemonic brother and force him back into the Webway as the gate was sealed.

#### Regent

Afterwards, Guilliman landed on Terra and gained access to the Emperor's Throne room inside the Imperial Palace. Guilliman stood before the Golden Throne alongside Captain-General Trajann Valoris, and the Emperor awoke for the first time in millennia. In a surreal experience which Guilliman can not fully remember, the now nearly inhuman Emperor told him that he was the last hope to save Mankind and brutally assaulted his mind with dark truths of the galaxy and its history. What exactly transpired is unclear. According to Valoris, Guilliman spoke in silent psychic conversation with the Emperor for several minutes, while Guilliman remembers falling to the ground in agony. Moreover, only minutes seemed to pass for the two, but when they emerged it had been over a day.

Regardless of the truth, Guilliman emerged with a new determination. He gathered the High Lords of Terra and declared that the Imperium would be reorganised and rearmed under his leadership in order to confront the coming threat of Chaos. With that, Guilliman declared himself Lord Commander of the Imperium once more. He later declared himself Imperial Regent, the living hand of the Emperor. One of his first major acts as Lord Commander was to defend Terra itself against the forces of Khorne in the Second Battle of Terra.

Guilliman subsequently declared the Indomitus Crusade to reclaim the devastated worlds isolated from Terra by the Great Rift. The campaign was waged for the next several years, as Guilliman acted as supreme commander and chief administrator of the Imperium. He simultaneously oversaw vast campaigns spearheaded by Belisarius Cawl's new Primaris Space Marines and sweeping civic reforms which culminated in the Codex Imperialis.

Guilliman soon learned of the Necron Pariah Nexus and learned from Cawl of the threat it represented to Humanity. He and Cawl planned for a major expedition into the Nephilim Sector on a mission to disrupt the network. During the Battle of Mesmoch, a massive fleet of Necron warships under Triarch and Szarekh's proxy Hapthatra the Radiant swept from the void to oppose Guilliman's attack. Speaking through Hapthatra, Szarekh demanded the Imperial surrender and proclaimed the galaxy as the Necron's domain. Guilliman unsurprisingly refused the Necron demands and ordered a fighting withdrawal aiming to keep the xenos occupied while Cawl completed their true objective at Planet 7/2.

It soon became apparent that the Necrons intended to capture, not destroy, the Imperials in hopes of perhaps gaining Guilliman. Ordering the evacuation of his flagship *Dawn of Fire*, Guilliman stayed on board with a force of Custodes under Colquan to draw the Necron's attention. The *Dawn of Fire* was quickly disabled by the Necrons, who boarded the vessel with troops as Guilliman and his entourage finally began an attempt to withdraw. Cato Sicarius, commander of the Victrix Guard, was able to destroy a Necron Lord to clear a path for Guilliman to flee as a gateway opened, revealing the Silent King Szarekh personally. Guilliman drew the Emperor's Sword and prepared for a fight, but was foiled by Illiyanne Natasé, who closed the portal and allowed the group to escape as the *Dawn of Fire* was destroyed. In the aftermath of the battle, with Cawl having largely achieved his mission to locally disrupt the Pariah Nexus, Guilliman left the Nephilim warzone and appointed White Consuls Captain Vitrian Messinius as its warden.

As the Indomitus Crusade wound down, he rushed back to Ultramar to protect his sons from the Onslaught of Nurgle. During the Plague Wars, Guilliman survived an assassination attempt by Mortarion, Typhus and Ku'Gath on Parmenio. Guilliman was nearly cornered in the trap but was saved by the efforts of a mysterious young girl that seemed to be a powerful Living Saint.

The Plague Wars came to their dramatic conclusion on Iax. Guilliman learned of the plot being enacted there by Mortarion and Ku'gath through interviewing a captured Daemonhost, much to the objection of his Tetrarch Decimus Felix. his Eldar liaison Illiyanne Natasé, and the Grey Knights. Despite knowing he was walking into a trap, Guilliman decided to nonetheless confront Mortarion on Iax. On the blighted world, the two came to blows. Guilliman was able to hold his own for a time, but was eventually defeated by the Daemon Primarch's Warp-enhanced might and resilience. With Guilliman disabled, Mortarion administered the deadly phage known as the Godblight which was capable of even killing a Primarch. Guilliman remained defiant as he succumb to the disease, refusing Mortarion's goading to give into Nurgle in order to have the pain end. Seemingly dead for a time, as his spirit hung in balance Guilliman experienced a surreal vision of his reunion with the Emperor upon his return. The vision makes it clear that not even Guilliman truly knows what transpired in the Throneroom that day save that the Emperor awoke for the first time in millennia. In reality, the Emperor's psychic might flowed through Guilliman and the Primarch was able to spring back to life, causing a shocked Mortarion to flee before the power of his father. Channeling the Emperor directly, Guilliman raised his Father's sword and unleashed a psychic attack that burned the Garden of Nurgle itself. The mightly blow was enough to damage a portion of the Garden and wound Nurgle personally. With that, the Primarch fell into unconsciousness.

Guilliman reappeared on Iax, where he explained the victory to Colquan. He later met with the recovered Militant-Apostolic Mathieu to thank him for his part in the victory on Iax, and the Priest informed the Primarch that the Emperor was preparing to return. Mathieu died shortly after, with Guilliman assuring the dead priest, that Mathieu's tale of heroism would be told to his sucessor and, should the new Militant-Apostolic, choose to do so, would not dissuade them from making Mathieu a Saint.  Now questioning his former atheism, Guilliman began to probe Cawl Inferior for the meaning of the Emperor's return and Godhood. After the victory on Iax he also expressed his intent to leave the Imperium Sanctus and journey into Imperium Nihilus to shore up its defenses.

The crusade fleet then planned to venture into Imperium Nihilus through the Nachmund Gauntlet. Much like the Indomitus Crusade's Torchbearer Fleets, the Imperial Regent planned to bolster any Space Marine Chapters found with Primaris reinforcements and the means for the Chapter to begin producing Primaris themselves. To aid in this, Guilliman sent a missive to Archmagos Cawl via the Cawl Inferior requesting an expert to accompany the fleet. Guilliman knew Cawl himself would decline, due to being preoccupied with reactivating the Necron pylon network, and suggested that trusted biologis or expert in all things Primaris. The Archmagos would send Qvo-88 in his stead.

Guilliman eventually succeeded in making it into Imperium Nihilus. He arrived at Baal as it was beset by both Tyranids and Chaos and helped save the Blood Angels and their Successor Chapters from destruction. After the battle Guilliman met with Dante, who he appointed as Regent of Imperium Nihilus and gave the resources to bring some semblance of order to the besieged realm. He then returned to the Imperium Sanctus to continue his work.

### Battlefleet Gothic: Armada

|  |  |
| --- | --- |

The Battlefleet Gothic: Armada II game provided four campaigns, each presented with possible outcomes for Roboute Guilliman.

* In the Imperial Campaign, Roboute takes the Macragge's Honour to link up with Lord High Admiral Spire's fleet, as part of a massive Imperial Campaign into the Eidolon Subsector. In the Savagar's Dust Cloud system, they manage to corner and destroy Abaddon the Despoiler, ending his life of 10,000 years, as well as many of his lieutenants. This ushers in a new era and a ray of hope for the Imperium, though The Long War against Chaos continues.
* In the Chaos Campaign, Roboute is ambushed and captured by Malos Vrykan, following information obtained from interrogating the secret traitor Lord High Admiral Drang. Malos gives Roboute as a gift to Abaddon who vows to torture Roboute before killing him. Roboute is not further mentioned in the campaign, though his ship the Macragge's Honour is converted by the forces of Chaos (though it is also destroyed in a failed mutiny against Malos by Dark Apostle Arkrist Vane).
* In the Tyranid Campaign, Roboute rallies the last Imperial Defenders to the Cadia System, all other major resistance in the surrounding sectors having fallen to the Tyranids. Despite his efforts, the Tyranids overwhelm his last stand, where he expresses his regret to the Emperor for having failed before his ship detonates.
* In the Necron Campaign, Phaeron Amarkun brings his fleet to battle against a combined Imperial fleet under Roboute Guilliman in the Belial IV system. The Imperials are ultimately defeated, and Roboute slain, paving the way for Amarkun's eventual rise and ultimate activation of the Dark Throne to seal the Eye of Terror.

## Description

An extract from Ultima Operational Record 1136.271.v (the official chronicle of the Battle of Calth) describes the Ultramarines' Primarch thus:

He is handsome, in a plain way. He is handsome the way a regent on an old coin is handsome, like a good sword is handsome. He is not handsome like a ritual weapon, the way Fulgrim is. He is not angelic, like Sanguinius...
  
  
There is a dutiful line to his jaw, like his good brother Dorn. They share a nobility. There is the great strength of Ferrus and the vitality of Mortarion. There is, sometimes, the rogue glint of the Khan in his eyes, or the solemnity of the Lion. In the architecture of his nose and brow there is, many claim, the energy and triumph of Horus Lupercal. There is none of the bitterness that shadows Corax, or the persecuted despair that haunts poor Konrad. There is never any of the deliberate mystery that obscures Alpharius or Magnus and he is more open than that buried soul Vulkan... He never displays the pitch of fury found in Angron, nor do his eyes ever ignite with the psychotic gleam of Russ...
  
  
He is a high achiever. He knows this about himself. Sometimes it feels like a fault that he has to excuse to his brothers, but then he feels guilty for making excuses... He writes a great deal. He codifies everything. Information is power. Technical theory is victory... He uses a stylus by choice, recording in his own handwriting.
  
  
He has been writing notes on T'Vanti war practices for seventeen minutes, but he has still noted and marked fifteen hundred data bulletins and updates that have tracked across the secondary screens to his left. He sees and reconciles everything. Information is victory.

## Wargear

It is known that at the height of his power during the Horus Heresy, Guilliman was armed with the *Hand of Dominion* — a mighty power gauntlet that with Guilliman's strength could fell a Titan, the *Gladius Incandor* — a blade of exceptional craftsmanship and a symbol of his Legion and also - with an Arbitrator, a customised combi-bolter. For protection, Guilliman wore a suit of Power Armour known as the *Armour of Reason*.

Upon his resurrection at the end of the 41st Millennium Guilliman continued to use the *Hand of Dominion* but took up the Emperor's Sword as his primary weapon. In addition, he now wears the *Armour of Fate*, the very device that allowed him to heal the injuries sustained by Fulgrim ten thousand years earlier.

## Bibliography

* On War
* The Writings of Roboute Guilliman
* Notes Towards Martial Codification
* Codex Astartes
  + Apocrypha of Skaros
  + Nova Codex Astartes
* Codex Imperialis

## Quotes

:   *See Space Marine Quotes*

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| **Quote** | **Notes** |
| ***Thousands of years. And look what has become of them. Of us. Idolatry. Ignorance. Suffering and squalor, in the name of a god who never desired the title.*** | White Dwarf May 2017, pg. 53 |
| ***In any battle, great or small, the most insignificant of terrain and the most worthless of ground can for minutes, or perhaps hours, become so valuable that the blood of heroes and the wealth of an army's supply does not outweigh it. The true general knows when such a price is worth spending, and when the butcher's bill is sheer folly to pay.***  - from the book *On War* | The Horus Heresy Book Five - Tempest pg.169 |
| ***Are we not Space Marines? Is this not the very task we were created for?***  -*Roboute Guilliman prior to the teleportation assault on the Zetsun Verid Yard* | The Horus Heresy Book Five - Tempest pg.172 |
| ***To conduct battle on two fronts is an act of either desperation or utter foolishness. In such an arena it is neither skill nor firepower that brings victory, but the ability to manipulate that of your enemy.***  - Codicil 19:23, The Writings of Roboute Guilliman | The Horus Heresy Book Six - Retribution pg.164 |
| ***To admit defeat is to blaspheme against the Emperor.*** | text-middle[Help] |
| ***The warrior who acts out of honour cannot fail. His duty is honour itself. Even his death - if it is honourable - is a reward and can be no failure, for it has come through duty. Seek honour as you act, therefore, and you will know no fear.*** | text-middle[Help] |
| ***Whatever the Emperor's will is, be sure it will find you out.** -attributed* | Nightbringer (Novel) by Graham McNeill, Chapter Eleven |
| ***Let them bestride the galaxy like the gods of old, sheltering Mankind from destruction at the hands of an uncaring universe.**  - from the teachings of Guilliman, as laid down in the Apocrypha of Skaros, on the Space Marines* | Codex: Space Marines (5th Edition), p. 31 |
| ***It is the great irony of the Legiones Astartes: engineered to kill to achieve a victory of peace that they can then be no part of.**  - shortly before the Battle of Calth* | Know No Fear (Novel) by Dan Abnett, Target//Acquisition, Chapter 3, p. 30 |
| ***Space Marines excel at warfare because they were designed to excel at everything. Each of you will become a leader, a ruler, the master of your world and, because there is no more fighting to be done, you will bend your transhuman talents to governance and culture.**  - shortly before the Battle of Calth* | Know No Fear (Novel) by Dan Abnett, Target//Acquisition, Chapter 3, p. 30 |
| '''***Never wish for danger. Danger needs no help. There is no such thing as fate that can be tempted, but morale is never improved by an active lust for war.  - Remark 56.xxi*** | Know No Fear (Novel) by Dan Abnett, Target//Acquisition, Chapter 3, p. 40 |
| ***Two things to note there, Sergeant. One is that there is no such thing as a minor detail. Information is victory. One cannot and should not dismiss any data until one is in a position to evaluate its significance, and that only comes with hindsight. So all detail is important until circumstances render it redundant.*** | Know No Fear (Novel) by Dan Abnett, Target//Acquisition, Chapter 8, pg. 94 |
| ***My brother, hear me. Warriors of the XVII Legion, hear me. This violence is against the code of the Legiones Astartes and against the will of our father, the Emperor. In the name of the Five Hundred Worlds of Ultramar, I implore you to cease fire and stand down. Open communication with me. Let us speak. Let us settle this. This action is an error of the most tragic kind. Cease fire. I, Roboute Guilliman, give you my solemn pledge that we will deal with each other frankly and fairly if these hostilities can be suspended. I urge you to respond.**  - vox transmission, Battle of Calth, Mark 0.00.01* | Know No Fear (Novel) by Dan Abnett, System//Kill, Chapter 1, p. 167 |
| ***Lorgar of Colchis. You may consider the following. One: I entirely withdraw my previous offer of solemn ceasefire. It is cancelled, and will not be made again, to you or to any other of your motherless bastards. Two: you are no longer any brother of mine. I will find you, I will kill you, and I will hurl your toxic corpse into hell's mouth.**  - vox transmission, Battle of Calth, Mark 1.57.42* | Know No Fear (Novel) by Dan Abnett, System//Kill, Chapter 3, p. 195 |
| ***What does not kill me... is not trying hard enough.*** | Know No Fear (Novel) by Dan Abnett, Ushkul//Thu, Chapter Two, pg. 348 |
| ***They shall be pure of heart and strong of body, untainted by doubt and unsullied by self-aggrandisement. They will be bright stars on the firmament of battle, Angels of Death whose shining wings bring swift annihilation to the enemies of Man. So it shall be for a thousand times for a thousand years, unto the very end of eternity and the extinction of mortal flesh.** Codex Astartes opening* | Codex: Space Marines (6th Edition) (e-book) pg. 246 |
| ***I am the fist, clenched tight in ceramite, smashing with the force of a Legion. I am the blade, awaiting my foe’s flesh, as keen as the Emperor could make me. I am the bolt, fired from afar – fleet and true, an end to all who stand before the Imperium of Man.** ---reference to raise the combat confusion with clarity, to banish doubt and reinforce a legionary’s purpose.* | The Honoured (Novella), Chapter Two |
| ***For the Emperor stands behind his sons as the primarchs behind their captains. It is a captain’s duty to place legionary lives in harm’s way before his own. There is too little glory in the galaxy to go around and officers must be generous in the trust they place in others – for one day such brothers must be captains too.** ---about the promotion of the newly assigned Space Marines* | The Honoured (Novella), Chapter Five |
| ***Man never changes. So war never changes.** -attributed* | Echoes of the Long War (Novel) by David Guymer, Chapter Nineteen |
| ***I will not be derelict in my duty to the Legion and to my Father. I can’t ensure my eternal existence. I will do everything in my power to ensure the Legion’s. The Ultramarines will be forever. You are my sons. You are my essence. So is the Legion, and what animates it.** ---about duty to lead Ultramarines.* | Roboute Guilliman: Lord of Ultramar (Novel), Chapter Two |
| ***Many things about this dark new age have caused me to question all that my father and I tried to build. Many things have disappointed me. The Chapter Master of my noble and loyal Ultramarines is most emphatically not one of them.*** | Codex Supplement: Ultramarines (8th Edition), pg. 64 |
| ***You will be my champion in this. You will be the one who bears the light of Imperial vigilance into this dark and silent void. To you I entrust the advance guard of my Fleet Primus, in the certain knowledge that you will drive back the shadows and defeat whatever evils they conceal. To you I entrust this hope.** -Roboute Guilliman to Groupmaster Marran* | White Dwarf 455, pg. 73 |
| ***Surrender. Retreat. Failure. These things are anathema to me just as they are to my sons. The Imperium is a realm beset, yet still the Emperor sits upon his throne and the spirit of Humanity burns strong. Our destiny lies not in surrender but in conquest; not in retreat but in relentless advance; not in failure but in victory, and the survival of the Emperor's realm! So now do I swear.*** | Codex Supplement: Ultramarines (8th Edition), pg. 38 - *Roboute Guilliman* |

## Gallery

## Related Videos

## Trivia

|  |  |
| --- | --- |

* The origin of Guilliman's name is unclear. It was thought it was based on Robert Charles Guillemin, a Boston based street artist in the 1980's famous for using acrylic paints. However, Rick Priestley has since said it was a name he made up that sounded like a West Indian revolutionary in a French colony (possibly Haiti).
* Belisarius Cawl remembers Guilliman as having a kindly face with sad brown eyes and always being worried, no joy in his life of duty.

## See also

* The Guilliman Inferior
* The Armour of Fate (Short Story)
